In all these situations you must pay attention, and you will perform less well, or not at all,
if you are not ready or if your attention is directed inappropriately. System 2 has some
ability to change the way System 1 works, by programming the normally automatic
functions of attention and memory. When waiting for a relative at a busy train station, for
example, you can set yourself at will to look for a white-haired woman or a bearded man,
and thereby increase the likelihood of detecting your relative from a distance. You can set
your memory to search for capital cities that start with N or for French existentialist
novels. And when you rent a car at London’s Heathrow Airport, the attendant will
probably remind you that “we drive on the left side of the road over here.” In all these
cases, you are asked to do something that does not come naturally, and you will find that
the consistent maintenance of a set requires continuous exertion of at least some effort.
The often-used phrase “pay attention” is apt: you dispose of a limited budget of
attention that you can allocate to activities, and if you try to you try to go beyond your
budget, you will fail. 

It is the mark of effortful activities that they interfere with each
other, which is why it is difficult or impossible to conduct several at once. You could not
compute the product of 17 × 24 while making a left turn into dense traffic, and you
certainly should not try. You can do several things at once, but only if they are easy and
undemanding. You are probably safe carrying on a conversation with a passenger while
driving on an empty highway, and many parents have discovered, perhaps with some guilt,
that they can read a story to a child while thinking of something else.
Everyone has some awareness of the limited capacity of attention, and our social
behavior makes allowances for these limitations. When the driver of a car is overtaking a
truck on a narrow road, for example, adult passengers quite sensibly stop talking. They
know that distracting the driver is not a good idea, and they also suspect that he is
temporarily deaf and will not hear what they say.

Intense focusing on a task can make people effectively blind, even to stimuli that
normally attract attention. The most dramatic demonstration was offered by Christopher
Chabris and Daniel Simons in their book The Invisible Gorilla. They constructed a short
film of two teams passing basketballs, one team wearing white shirts, the other wearing
black. The viewers of the film are instructed to count the number of passes made by the
white team, ignoring the black players. This task is difficult and completely absorbing.
Halfway through the video, a woman wearing a gorilla suit appears, crosses the court,
thumps her chest, and moves on. The gorilla is in view for 9 seconds. Many thousands of
people have seen the video, and about half of them do not notice anything unusual. It is
the counting task—and especially the instruction to ignore one of the teams—that causes
the blindness. No one who watches the video without that task would miss the gorilla.

Seeing and orienting are automatic functions of System 1, but they depend on the
allocation of some attention to the relevant stimulus. The authors note that the most
remarkable observation of their study is that people find its results very surprising. Indeed,
the viewers who fail to see the gorilla are initially sure that it was not there—they cannot
imagine missing such a striking event. The gorilla study illustrates two important facts
about our minds: we can be blind to the obvious, and we are also blind to our blindness.

The interaction of the two systems is a recurrent theme of the book, and a brief synopsis of
the plot is in order. In the story I will tell, Systems 1 and 2 are both active whenever we
are awake. System 1 runs automatically and System 2 is normally in a comfortable low-
effort mode, in which only a fraction of its capacity is engaged. System 1 continuously
generates suggestions for System 2: impressions, intuitions, intentions, and feelings. If
endorsed by System 2, impressions and intuitions turn into beliefs, and impulses turn into
voluntary actions. When all goes smoothly, which is most of the time, System 2 adopts the
suggestions of System 1 with little or no modification. You generally believe your
impressions and act on your desires, and that is fine—usually.

When System 1 runs into difficulty, it calls on System 2 to support more detailed and
specific processing that may solve the problem of the moment. System 2 is mobilized
when a question arises for which System 1 does not offer an answer, as probably happened
to you when you encountered the multiplication problem 17 × 24. You can also feel a
surge of conscious attention whenever you are surprised. System 2 is activ”>< 2 is actated
when an event is detected that violates the model of the world that System 1 maintains. In
that world, lamps do not jump, cats do not bark, and gorillas do not cross basketball
courts. The gorilla experiment demonstrates that some attention is needed for the
surprising stimulus to be detected. 

Surprise then activates and orients your attention: you
will stare, and you will search your memory for a story that makes sense of the surprising
event. System 2 is also credited with the continuous monitoring of your own behavior—
the control that keeps you polite when you are angry, and alert when you are driving at
night. System 2 is mobilized to increased effort when it detects an error about to be made.
Remember a time when you almost blurted out an offensive remark and note how hard
you worked to restore control. In summary, most of what you (your System 2) think and
do originates in your System 1, but System 2 takes over when things get difficult, and it
normally has the last word.

The division of labor between System 1 and System 2 is highly efficient: it minimizes
effort and optimizes performance. The arrangement works well most of the time because
System 1 is generally very good at what it does: its models of familiar situations are
accurate, its short-term predictions are usually accurate as well, and its initial reactions to
challenges are swift and generally appropriate. System 1 has biases, however, systematic
errors that it is prone to make in specified circumstances. As we shall see, it sometimes
answers easier questions than the one it was asked, and it has little understanding of logic
and statistics. One further limitation of System 1 is that it cannot be turned off. If you are
shown a word on the screen in a language you know, you will read it—unless your
attention is totally focused elsewhere.

These tasks engage System 2, because saying “upper/lower” or “right/left” is not what
you routinely do when looking down a column of words. One of the things you did to set
yourself for the task was to program your memory so that the relevant words (upper and
lower for the first task) were “on the tip of your tongue.” The prioritizing of the chosen
words is effective and the mild temptation to read other words was fairly easy to resist
when you went through the first column. But the second column was different, because it
contained words for which you were set, and you could not ignore them. You were mostly
able to respond correctly, but overcoming the competing response was a strain, and it
slowed you down. You experienced a conflict between a task that you intended to carry
out and an automatic response that interfered with it.

Conflict between an automatic reaction and an intention to conWhetion to ctrol it is
common in our lives. We are all familiar with the experience of trying not to stare at the
oddly dressed couple at the neighboring table in a restaurant. We also know what it is like
to force our attention on a boring book, when we constantly find ourselves returning to the
point at which the reading lost its meaning. Where winters are hard, many drivers have
memories of their car skidding out of control on the ice and of the struggle to follow well-
rehearsed instructions that negate what they would naturally do: “Steer into the skid, and
whatever you do, do not touch the brakes!” And every human being has had the
experience of not telling someone to go to hell. One of the tasks of System 2 is to
overcome the impulses of System 1. In other words, System 2 is in charge of self-control

Now that you have measured the lines, you—your System 2, the conscious being you
call “I”—have a new belief: you know that the lines are equally long. If asked about their
length, you will say what you know. But you still see the bottom line as longer. You have
chosen to believe the measurement, but you cannot prevent System 1 from doing its thing;
you cannot decide to see the lines as equal, although you know they are. To resist the
illusion, there is only one thing you can do: you must learn to mistrust your impressions of
the length of lines when fins are attached to them. To implement that rule, you must be
able to recognize the illusory pattern and recall what you know about it. If you can do this,
you will never again be fooled by the Müller-Lyer illusion. But you will still see one line
as longer than the other.

Not all illusions are visual. There are illusions of thought, which we call cognitive
illusions. As a graduate student, I attended some courses on the art and science of
psychotherapy. During one of these lectures, our teacher imparted a morsel of clinical
wisdom. This is what he told us: “You will from time to time meet a patient who shares a
disturbing tale of multiple mistakes in his previous treatment. He has been seen by several
clinicians, and all failed him. The patient can lucidly describe how his therapists
misunderstood him, but he has quickly perceived that you are different. You share the
same feeling, are convinced that you understand him, and will be able to help.” At this
point my teacher raised his voice as he said, “Do not even think of taking on this patient!
Throw him out of the office! He is most likely a psychopath and you will not be able to
help him.”

Many years later I learned that the teacher had warned us against psychopathic charm,
and the leading authority in the strn y in the udy of psychopathy confirmed that the
teacher’s advice was sound. The analogy to the Müller-Lyer illusion is close. What we
were being taught was not how to feel about that patient. Our teacher took it for granted
that the sympathy we would feel for the patient would not be under our control; it would
arise from System 1. Furthermore, we were not being taught to be generally suspicious of
our feelings about patients. We were told that a strong attraction to a patient with a
repeated history of failed treatment is a danger sign—like the fins on the parallel lines. It
is an illusion—a cognitive illusion—and I (System 2) was taught how to recognize it and
advised not to believe it or act on it.

The question that is most often asked about cognitive illusions is whether they can be
overcome. The message of these examples is not encouraging. Because System 1 operates
automatically and cannot be turned off at will, errors of intuitive thought are often difficult
to prevent. Biases cannot always be avoided, because System 2 may have no clue to the
error. Even when cues to likely errors are available, errors can be prevented only by the
enhanced monitoring and effortful activity of System 2. As a way to live your life,
however, continuous vigilance is not necessarily good, and it is certainly impractical.
Constantly questioning our own thinking would be impossibly tedious, and System 2 is
much too slow and inefficient to serve as a substitute for System 1 in making routine
decisions. The best we can do is a compromise: learn to recognize situations in which
mistakes are likely and try harder to avoid significant mistakes when the stakes are high.
The premise of this book is that it is easier to recognize other people’s mistakes than our
own.

If you would like to know what your body is doing while your mind is hard at work,
set up two piles of books on a sturdy table, place a video camera on one and lean your
chin on the other, get the video going, and stare at the camera lens while you work on
Add-1 or Add-3 exercises. Later, you will find in the changing size of your pupils a
faithful record of how hard you worked.
I have a long personal history with the Add-1 task. Early in my career I spent a year at
the University of Michigan, as a visitor in a laboratory that studied hypnosis. Casting
about for a useful topic of research, I found an article in Scientific American in which the
psychologist Eckhard Hess described the pupil of the eye as a window to the soul. I reread
it recently and again found it inspiring. It begins with Hess reporting that his wife had
noticed his pupils widening as he watched beautiful nature pictures, and it ends with two
striking pictures of the same good-looking woman, who somehow appears much more
attractive in one than in the other. There is only one difference: the pupils of the eyes
appear dilated in the attractive picture and constricted in the other. Hess also wrote of
belladonna, a pupil-dilating substance that was used as a cosmetic, and of bazaar shoppers
who wear dark glasses in order to hide their level of interest from merchants.

One of Hess’s findings especially captured my attention. He had noticed that the
pupils are sensitive indicators of mental effort—they dilate substantially when people
multiply two-digit numbers, and they dilate more if the problems are hard than if they are
easy. His observations indicated that the response to mental effort is distinct from
emotional arousal. Hess’s work did not have much to do with hypnosis, but I concluded
that the idea of a visible indication of mental effort had promise as a research topic. A
graduate student in the lab, Jackson Beatty, shared my enthusiasm and we got to work.
Beatty and I developed a setup similar to an optician’s examination room, in which
the experimental participant leaned her head on a chin-and-forehead rest and stared at a
camera while listening to prerecorded information and answering questions on the
recorded beats of a metronome. The beats triggered an infrared flash every second,
causing a picture to be taken. At the end of each experimental session, we would rush to
have the film developed, project the images of the pupil on a screen, and go to work with a
ruler. The method was a perfect fit for young and impatient researchers: we knew our
results almost immediately, and they always told a clear story.

Beatty and I focused on paced tasks, such as Add-1, in which we knew precisely what
was on the subject’s mind at any time. We recorded strings of digits on beats of the
metronome and instructed the subject to repeat or transform the digits one indigits onby
one, maintaining the same rhythm. We soon discovered that the size of the pupil varied
second by second, reflecting the changing demands of the task. The shape of the response
was an inverted V. As you experienced it if you tried Add-1 or Add-3, effort builds up
with every added digit that you hear, reaches an almost intolerable peak as you rush to
produce a transformed string during and immediately after the pause, and relaxes
gradually as you “unload” your short-term memory. The pupil data corresponded precisely
to subjective experience: longer strings reliably caused larger dilations, the transformation
task compounded the effort, and the peak of pupil size coincided with maximum effort.

Add-1 with four digits caused a larger dilation than the task of holding seven digits for
immediate recall. Add-3, which is much more difficult, is the most demanding that I ever
observed. In the first 5 seconds, the pupil dilates by about 50% of its original area and
heart rate increases by about 7 beats per minute. This is as hard as people can work—they
give up if more is asked of them. When we exposed our subjects to more digits than they
could remember, their pupils stopped dilating or actually shrank.

We worked for some months in a spacious basement suite in which we had set up a
closed-circuit system that projected an image of the subject’s pupil on a screen in the
corridor; we also could hear what was happening in the laboratory. The diameter of the
projected pupil was about a foot; watching it dilate and contract when the participant was
at work was a fascinating sight, quite an attraction for visitors in our lab. We amused
ourselves and impressed our guests by our ability to divine when the participant gave up
on a task. During a mental multiplication, the pupil normally dilated to a large size within
a few seconds and stayed large as long as the individual kept working on the problem; it
contracted immediately when she found a solution or gave up. As we watched from the
corridor, we would sometimes surprise both the owner of the pupil and our guests by
asking, “Why did you stop working just now?” The answer from inside the lab was often,
“How did you know?” to which we would reply, “We have a window to your soul.”

The casual observations we made from the corridor were sometimes as informative as
the formal experiments. I made a significant discovery as I was idly watching a woman’s
pupil during a break between two tasks. She had kept her position on the chin rest, so I
could see the image of her eye while she engaged in routine conversation with the
experimenter. I was surprised to see that the pupil remained small and did not noticeably
dilate as she talked and listened. Unlike the tasks that we were studying, the mundane
conversation apparently demanded little or no effort—no more than retaining two or three
digits. This was a eureka moment: I realized that the tasks we had chosen for study were
exceptionally effortful. An image came to mind: mental life—today I would speak of the
life of System 2—is normally conducted at the pace of a comfortable walk, sometimes
interrupted by episodes of jogging and on rare occasions by a frantic sprint. The Add-1
and Add-3 exercises are sprints, and casual chatting is a stroll.

We found that people, when engaged in a mental sprint, may become effectively
blind. The authors of The Invisible Gorilla had made the gorilla “invisible” by keeping the
observers intensely busy counting passes. We reported a rather less dramatic example of
blindness during Add-1. Our subjects were exposed to a series of rapidly flashing letters
while they worked. They were told to give the task complete priority, but they were also
asked to report, at the end of the digit task, whether the letter K had appeared at any rored
at antime during the trial. The main finding was that the ability to detect and report the
target letter changed in the course of the 10 seconds of the exercise. The observers almost
never missed a K that was shown at the beginning or near the end of the Add-1 task but
they missed the target almost half the time when mental effort was at its peak, although we
had pictures of their wide-open eye staring straight at it. Failures of detection followed the
same inverted-V pattern as the dilating pupil. The similarity was reassuring: the pupil was
a good measure of the physical arousal that accompanies mental effort, and we could go
ahead and use it to understand how the mind works.

Much like the electricity meter outside your house or apartment, the pupils offer an
index of the current rate at which mental energy is used. The analogy goes deep. Your use
of electricity depends on what you choose to do, whether to light a room or toast a piece of
bread. When you turn on a bulb or a toaster, it draws the energy it needs but no more.
Similarly, we decide what to do, but we have limited control over the effort of doing it.
Suppose you are shown four digits, say, 9462, and told that your life depends on holding
them in memory for 10 seconds. However much you want to live, you cannot exert as
much effort in this task as you would be forced to invest to complete an Add-3
transformation on the same digits.

System 2 and the electrical circuits in your home both have limited capacity, but they
respond differently to threatened overload. A breaker trips when the demand for current is
excessive, causing all devices on that circuit to lose power at once. In contrast, the
response to mental overload is selective and precise: System 2 protects the most important
activity, so it receives the attention it needs; “spare capacity” is allocated second by
second to other tasks. In our version of the gorilla experiment, we instructed the
participants to assign priority to the digit task. We know that they followed that
instruction, because the timing of the visual target had no effect on the main task. If the
critical letter was presented at a time of high demand, the subjects simply did not see it.
When the transformation task was less demanding, detection performance was better.
The sophisticated allocation of attention has been honed by a long evolutionary
history. Orienting and responding quickly to the gravest threats or most promising
opportunities improved the chance of survival, and this capability is certainly not
restricted to humans. Even in modern humans, System 1 takes over in emergencies and
assigns total priority to self-protective actions. Imagine yourself at the wheel of a car that
unexpectedly skids on a large oil slick. You will find that you have responded to the threat
before you became fully conscious of it.

Beatty and I worked together for only a year, but our collaboration had a large effect
on our subsequent careers. He eventually became the leading authority on “cognitive
pupillometry,” and I wrote a book titled Attention and Effort, which was based in large
part on what we learned together and on follow-up research I did at Harvard the following
year. We learned a great deal about the working mind—which I now think of as System 2
—from measuring pupils in a wide variety of tasks.
As you become skilled in a task, its demand for energy diminishes. Studies of the
brain have shown that the pattern of activity associated with an action changes as skill
increases, with fewer brain regions involved. Talent has similar effects. Highly intelligent
individuals need less effort to solve the same problems, as indicated by both pupil size and
brain activity. A general “law of least effort” appd t” alies to cognitive as well as physical
exertion. The law asserts that if there are several ways of achieving the same goal, people
will eventually gravitate to the least demanding course of action. In the economy of
action, effort is a cost, and the acquisition of skill is driven by the balance of benefits and
costs. Laziness is built deep into our nature.

The tasks that we studied varied considerably in their effects on the pupil. At baseline,
our subjects were awake, aware, and ready to engage in a task—probably at a higher level
of arousal and cognitive readiness than usual. Holding one or two digits in memory or
learning to associate a word with a digit (3 = door) produced reliable effects on
momentary arousal above that baseline, but the effects were minuscule, only 5% of the
increase in pupil diameter associated with Add-3. A task that required discriminating
between the pitch of two tones yielded significantly larger dilations. Recent research has
shown that inhibiting the tendency to read distracting words (as in figure 2 of the
preceding chapter) also induces moderate effort. Tests of short-term memory for six or
seven digits were more effortful. As you can experience, the request to retrieve and say
aloud your phone number or your spouse’s birthday also requires a brief but significant
effort, because the entire string must be held in memory as a response is organized. Mental
multiplication of two-digit numbers and the Add-3 task are near the limit of what most
people can do.

What makes some cognitive operations more demanding and effortful than others?
What outcomes must we purchase in the currency of attention? What can System 2 do that
System 1 cannot? We now have tentative answers to these questions.
Effort is required to maintain simultaneously in memory several ideas that require
separate actions, or that need to be combined according to a rule—rehearsing your
shopping list as you enter the supermarket, choosing between the fish and the veal at a
restaurant, or combining a surprising result from a survey with the information that the
sample was small, for example. System 2 is the only one that can follow rules, compare
objects on several attributes, and make deliberate choices between options. The automatic
System 1 does not have these capabilities. System 1 detects simple relations (“they are all
alike,” “the son is much taller than the father”) and excels at integrating information about
one thing, but it does not deal with multiple distinct topics at once, nor is it adept at using
purely statistical information. System 1 will detect that a person described as “a meek and
tidy soul, with a need for order and structure, and a passion for detail” resembles a
caricature librarian, but combining this intuition with knowledge about the small number
of librarians is a task that only System 2 can perform—if System 2 knows how to do so,
which is true of few people.

A crucial capability of System 2 is the adoption of “task sets”: it can program memory
to obey an instruction that overrides habitual responses. Consider the following: Count all
occurrences of the letter f in this page. This is not a task you have ever performed before
and it will not come naturally to you, but your System 2 can take it on. It will be effortful
to set yourself up for this exercise, and effortful to carry it out, though you will surely
improve with practice. Psychologists speak of “executive control” to describe the adoption
and termination of task sets, and neuroscientists have identified the main regions of the
brain that serve the executive function. One of these regions is involved whenever a
conflict must be resolved. Another is the prefrontal area of the brain, a region that is
substantially more developed in humans tht un humans an in other primates, and is
involved in operations that we associate with intelligence.

Now suppose that at the end of the page you get another instruction: count all the
commas in the next page. This will be harder, because you will have to overcome the
newly acquired tendency to focus attention on the letter f. One of the significant
discoveries of cognitive psychologists in recent decades is that switching from one task to
another is effortful, especially under time pressure. The need for rapid switching is one of
the reasons that Add-3 and mental multiplication are so difficult. To perform the Add-3
task, you must hold several digits in your working memory at the same time, associating
each with a particular operation: some digits are in the queue to be transformed, one is in
the process of transformation, and others, already transformed, are retained for reporting.
Modern tests of working memory require the individual to switch repeatedly between two
demanding tasks, retaining the results of one operation while performing the other. People
who do well on these tests tend to do well on tests of general intelligence. However, the
ability to control attention is not simply a measure of intelligence; measures of efficiency
in the control of attention predict performance of air traffic controllers and of Israeli Air
Force pilots beyond the effects of intelligence.

Time pressure is another driver of effort. As you carried out the Add-3 exercise, the
rush was imposed in part by the metronome and in part by the load on memory. Like a
juggler with several balls in the air, you cannot afford to slow down; the rate at which
material decays in memory forces the pace, driving you to refresh and rehearse
information before it is lost. Any task that requires you to keep several ideas in mind at the
same time has the same hurried character. Unless you have the good fortune of a
capacious working memory, you may be forced to work uncomfortably hard. The most
effortful forms of slow thinking are those that require you to think fast.
You surely observed as you performed Add-3 how unusual it is for your mind to work
so hard. Even if you think for a living, few of the mental tasks in which you engage in the
course of a working day are as demanding as Add-3, or even as demanding as storing six
digits for immediate recall. We normally avoid mental overload by dividing our tasks into
multiple easy steps, committing intermediate results to long-term memory or to paper
rather than to an easily overloaded working memory. We cover long distances by taking
our time and conduct our mental lives by the law of least effort.

I spend a few months each year in Berkeley, and one of my great pleasures there is a daily
four-mile walk on a marked path in the hills, with a fine view of San Francisco Bay. I
usually keep track of my time and have learned a fair amount about effort from doing so. I
have found a speed, about 17 minutes for a mile, which I experience as a stroll. I certainly
exert physical effort and burn more calories at that speed than if I sat in a recliner, but I
experience no strain, no conflict, and no need to push myself. I am also able to think and
work while walking at that rate. Indeed, I suspect that the mild physical arousal of the
walk may spill over into greater mental alertness.

System 2 also has a natural speed. You expend some mental energy in random
thoughts and in monitoring what goes on around you even when your mind does nothing
in particular, but there is little strain. Unless you are in a situation that makes you
unusually wary or self-conscious, monitoring what happens in the environment or inside
your head demands little effort. You make many small decisions as you drive your car,
absorb some information as you read the newspaper, and conduct routine exchanges of
pleasantries with a spouse or a colleague, all with little effort and no strain. Just like a
stroll.

It is normally easy and actually quite pleasant to walk and think at the same time, but
at the extremes these activities appear to compete for the limited resources of System 2.
You can confirm this claim by a simple experiment. While walking comfortably with a
friend, ask him to compute 23 × 78 in his head, and to do so immediately. He will almost
certainly stop in his tracks. My experience is that I can think while strolling but cannot
engage in mental work that imposes a heavy load on short-term memory. If I must
construct an intricate argument under time pressure, I would rather be still, and I would
prefer sitting to standing. Of course, not all slow thinking requires that form of intense
concentration and effortful computation—I did the best thinking of my life on leisurely
walks with Amos.

Accelerating beyond my strolling speed completely changes the experience of
walking, because the transition to a faster walk brings about a sharp deterioration in my
ability to think coherently. As I speed up, my attention is drawn with increasing frequency
to the experience of walking and to the deliberate maintenance of the faster pace. My
ability to bring a train of thought to a conclusion is impaired accordingly. At the highest
speed I can sustain on the hills, about 14 minutes for a mile, I do not even try to think of
anything else. In addition to the physical effort of moving my body rapidly along the path,
a mental effort of self-control is needed to resist the urge to slow down. Self-control and
deliberate thought apparently draw on the same limited budget of effort.
For most of us, most of the time, the maintenance of a coherent train of thought and
the occasional engagement in effortful thinking also require self-control. Although I have
not conducted a systematic survey, I suspect that frequent switching of tasks and speeded-
up mental work are not intrinsically pleasurable, and that people avoid them when
possible. This is how the law of least effort comes to be a law. Even in the absence of time
pressure, maintaining a coherent train of thought requires discipline. An observer of the
number of times I look at e-mail or investigate the refrigerator during an hour of writing
could wahene dd reasonably infer an urge to escape and conclude that keeping at it
requires more self-control than I can readily muster.

Fortunately, cognitive work is not always aversive, and people sometimes expend
considerable effort for long periods of time without having to exert willpower. The
psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (pronounced six-cent-mihaly) has done more than
anyone else to study this state of effortless attending, and the name he proposed for it,
flow, has become part of the language. People who experience flow describe it as “a state
of effortless concentration so deep that they lose their sense of time, of themselves, of
their problems,” and their descriptions of the joy of that state are so compelling that
Csikszentmihalyi has called it an “optimal experience.” Many activities can induce a sense
of flow, from painting to racing motorcycles—and for some fortunate authors I know,
even writing a book is often an optimal experience. Flow neatly separates the two forms of
effort: concentration on the task and the deliberate control of attention. Riding a
motorcycle at 150 miles an hour and playing a competitive game of chess are certainly
very effortful. In a state of flow, however, maintaining focused attention on these
absorbing activities requires no exertion of self-control, thereby freeing resources to be
directed to the task at hand.

It is now a well-established proposition that both self-control and cognitive effort are
forms of mental work. Several psychological studies have shown that people who are
simultaneously challenged by a demanding cognitive task and by a temptation are more
likely to yield to the temptation. Imagine that you are asked to retain a list of seven digits
for a minute or two. You are told that remembering the digits is your top priority. While
your attention is focused on the digits, you are offered a choice between two desserts: a
sinful chocolate cake and a virtuous fruit salad. The evidence suggests that you would be
more likely to select the tempting chocolate cake when your mind is loaded with digits.
System 1 has more influence on behavior when System 2 is busy, and it has a sweet tooth.

People who are cognitively busy are also more likely to make selfish choices, use
sexist language, and make superficial judgments in social situations. Memorizing and
repeating digits loosens the hold of System 2 on behavior, but of course cognitive load is
not the only cause of weakened self-control. A few drinks have the same effect, as does a
sleepless night. The self-control of morning people is impaired at night; the reverse is true
of night people. Too much concern about how well one is doing in a task sometimes
disrupts performance by loading short-term memory with pointless anxious thoughts. The
conclusion is straightforward: self-control requires attention and effort. Another way of
saying this is that controlling thoughts and behaviors is one of the tasks that System 2
performs.

A series of surprising experiments by the psychologist Roy Baumeister and his
colleagues has shown conclusively that all variants of voluntary effort—cognitive,
emotional, or physical—draw at least partly on a shared pool of mental energy. Their
experiments involve successive rather than simultaneous tasks.

Baumeister’s group has repeatedly found that an effort of will or self-control is tiring;
if you have had to force yourself to do something, you are less willing or less able to exert
self-control when the next challenge comes around. The phenomenon has been named ego
depletion. In a typical demo thypical denstration, participants who are instructed to stifle
their emotional reaction to an emotionally charged film will later perform poorly on a test
of physical stamina—how long they can maintain a strong grip on a dynamometer in spite
of increasing discomfort. The emotional effort in the first phase of the experiment reduces
the ability to withstand the pain of sustained muscle contraction, and ego-depleted people
therefore succumb more quickly to the urge to quit. In another experiment, people are first
depleted by a task in which they eat virtuous foods such as radishes and celery while
resisting the temptation to indulge in chocolate and rich cookies. Later, these people will
give up earlier than normal when faced with a difficult cognitive task